src/finetune/README.md, before:

# Finetuning for Language Understanding and Generation

There are at lease two instructed models you might need to fine-tune for better performance. But you can only
do this when you have some reasonable amount of labeled example available. The goal of fine-tuning code base
is make it possible for the advanced developers to squeeze the last bit of the performance of this architecture, 
for most of the developer, we hope the default configuration plus the hotfixing capability is enough.  

While it is possible to fine-tune both the generator and embedding needed by retrieval, we will support the 
fine-tuning in three steps:
1. Finetune generator, in full.
2. Finetune generator, using lora (this does not change overall process, just how to set up training and inference).
3. Finetune embedding.

Here support means we will have tested code and enough documentation for you to replicate the process. Additionally,
we will support the tool-use or function calling use case first, since dialog understanding related tasks are 
largely depending on the dialog state tracking design, different designs can have different requirements. We will
focus on the OpenCUI state tracking design for now. As in general, we only focus on the understanding related 
fine-tune for now. 

## How to finetune the generator for understanding

Fine-tuning the generator is an extra step needed for understanding. One still need to define the schema first. When
you have a schema, the main thing you need to do is: 
1. Prepare the labeled examples in form of AnnotatedExemplar.
2. Trigger the fine-tuning for generator, so that you can use the model for inference.

### Prepare exemplars
For now, we assume that the labeled examples for fine-tuning generator requires a couple of things:
- user utterance, for example: "I like to get a ticket to New York"
- template, a value normalized utterance, for example: "I like to get <quantity> ticket to <destination>".
- target_name, function (also known as intent, skill) name, for example "buy_airline_ticket"
- target_arguments, parameter (or slot) values, for example: {"quantity" : 1, "destination" : "new york"} 

Notice, with just user utterance and slot values, we might not be able to recover corresponding exemplar, if some
slot value occurs more than one time in the utterance. So in general, the label process need to explicitly provider
exemplars, or provide span for each value, or risk some labeled example is discarded during the fine-tuning. For now,
we assume that a parameter/slot is recognized is either by recognizer or LLM, but not both. This requirement is only 
good enough for tool-use use cases, for dialog understanding, there are some additional considerations depending on the
state tracking implementation.

Per standard practices, it will be good if you prepare three datasets, for training, validation and testing. The first
datasets that we are using is based on [schema-guided dialogue dataset](https://github.com/google-research-datasets/dstc8-schema-guided-dialogue).

To create the training examples from the supplied schemas and exemplars, it is possible that we need to generate
negative examples, this requires that the functions from each module is mutually exclusive in the semantic space,
and there is no overloaded functions. Overloaded functions need to handled in the state tracking. At beginning, we only
support the single module, but there is plan to support multiple modules.


### Determine the hyperparameters for retrieval
One of the main consideration for fine-tuning generation for RAG is what dynamic information are needed by prompt.
So special care need to be taken to make sure that instantiated prompt meet the criteria you had when you design the 
prompt templated. For example, if you assume that the correct answer should be included in the prompt, then you will
need to make sure that is indeed is the case. So you need to run some experiments to make sure that you choose the
correct value for hyperparameters.

The script you can use to determine the hyperparameter for retrieval:
```bash
python3 funetune/find_k_for_prompt.py 
```
Assuming that you have schema-guided dialogue dataset at <dir for lug>/../dstc8-schema-guided-dialogue/

### Fine-tune the generation model

```bash
python3 finetune/generation.sh
```

## Special considerations
Fine-tuning generator for RAG applications bring some new considerations. 

### How to retrieve
The description can be retrieved using embedding only. The exemplar should be retrieved in hybrid mode, with both
embedding and  keyword search. The vector search for description should use asymmetrical dual embedding, while for 
exemplar, vector search should use symmetrical embedding, using the same model for both user utterance and exemplars.

### How to model the conversion
There are many potential system architecture to model the conversation. For example, we can do one-shot model, or using
single model or prompt to predict both function name and its arguments. We can also have two models, one for predicting
function name, and one for predicting arguments. In this latter approach, we have two approaches:
1. Only extract value for one slot at each time,
2. Extract value for all slot in one shot. 

We will focus on using two models to solve the conversion, and focus on extracting value for one slot each time. Of
course, since we are using decoder-only model, two models are really just two different prompt templates typically
using the same model. 


Reference:
1. [How to fine-tune both retriever and generator for better performance](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.01352.pdf)
2. [How to fine-tune retriever assuming blackbox generator](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.12652.pdf)

Commit message:

update the README under fine-tune

src/finetune/README.md, after:

# Finetuning for Language Understanding and Generation

There are at lease two instructed models you might need to fine-tune for better performance. But you can only
do this when you have some reasonable amount of labeled example available. The goal of fine-tuning code base
is make it possible for the advanced developers to squeeze the last bit of the performance of this architecture, 
for most of the developer, we hope the default configuration plus the hotfixing capability is enough.  

While it is possible to fine-tune both the generator and embedding needed by retrieval, we will support the 
fine-tuning in three steps:
1. Finetune generator, in full.
2. Finetune generator, using lora (this does not change overall process, just how to set up training and inference).
3. Finetune embedding.

Here support means we will have tested code and enough documentation for you to replicate the process. Additionally,
we will support the tool-use or function calling use case first, since dialog understanding related tasks are 
largely depending on the dialog state tracking design, different designs can have different requirements. We will
focus on the OpenCUI state tracking design for now. As in general, we only focus on the understanding related 
fine-tune for now. 

## How to finetune the generator for understanding

Fine-tuning the generator is an extra step needed for understanding. One still need to define the schema first. When
you have a schema, the main thing you need to do is: 
1. Prepare the labeled examples in form of AnnotatedExemplar.
2. Trigger the fine-tuning for generator, so that you can use the model for inference.

### Prepare exemplars
For now, we assume that the labeled examples for fine-tuning generator requires a couple of things:
- user utterance, for example: "I like to get a ticket to New York"
- template, a value normalized utterance, for example: "I like to get <quantity> ticket to <destination>".
- target_name, function (also known as intent, skill) name, for example "buy_airline_ticket"
- target_arguments, parameter (or slot) values, for example: {"quantity" : 1, "destination" : "new york"} 

Notice, with just user utterance and slot values, we might not be able to recover corresponding exemplar, if some
slot value occurs more than one time in the utterance. So in general, the label process need to explicitly provider
exemplars, or provide span for each value, or risk some labeled example is discarded during the fine-tuning. For now,
we assume that a parameter/slot is recognized is either by recognizer or LLM, but not both. This requirement is only 
good enough for tool-use use cases, for dialog understanding, there are some additional considerations depending on the
state tracking implementation.

Per standard practices, it will be good if you prepare three datasets, for training, validation and testing. The first
datasets that we are using is based on [schema-guided dialogue dataset](https://github.com/google-research-datasets/dstc8-schema-guided-dialogue).

To create the training examples from the supplied schemas and exemplars, it is possible that we need to generate
negative examples, this requires that the functions from each module is mutually exclusive in the semantic space,
and there is no overloaded functions. Overloaded functions need to handled in the state tracking. At beginning, we only
support the single module, but there is plan to support multiple modules.


### Determine the hyperparameters for retrieval
One of the main consideration for fine-tuning generation for RAG is what dynamic information are needed by prompt.
So special care need to be taken to make sure that instantiated prompt meet the criteria you had when you design the 
prompt templated. For example, if you assume that the correct answer should be included in the prompt, then you will
need to make sure that is indeed is the case. So you need to run some experiments to make sure that you choose the
correct value for hyperparameters.

The script you can use to determine the hyperparameter for retrieval:
```bash
python3 funetune/find_k_for_prompt.py 
```
Assuming that you have schema-guided dialogue dataset at <dir for lug>/../dstc8-schema-guided-dialogue/

### Fine-tune the generation model
By default, OpenLug uses a cascade model, where we use a lora based skill more to determine the skill/function 
first, then use a different lora adaptor for determine the slot/parameter values. Ideally, both adaptors are 
paired with the same base model. The generation models need to be fine-tuned separately. Mainly by changing the shared 
configuration in core/config.py and training aspect in finetune/generation.sh.  

Use skill and extractive_slot for training_mode in finetune/generation.sh for fine-tuning skill and slot models respectively.

```bash
python3 finetune/generation.sh
```

After finetune, it is advised to publish the resulting adaptors to huggingface so that people can test your adaptors.

### Testing
The follow python script can be used to test finetuned adaptors.
```bash
python3 fineturn/test.py 
```


## Special considerations
Fine-tuning generator for RAG applications bring some new considerations. 

### How to retrieve
The description can be retrieved using embedding only. The exemplar should be retrieved in hybrid mode, with both
embedding and  keyword search. The vector search for description should use asymmetrical dual embedding, while for 
exemplar, vector search should use symmetrical embedding, using the same model for both user utterance and exemplars.

### How to model the conversion
There are many potential system architecture to model the conversation. For example, we can do one-shot model, or using
single model or prompt to predict both function name and its arguments. We can also have two models, one for predicting
function name, and one for predicting arguments. In this latter approach, we have two approaches:
1. Only extract value for one slot at each time,
2. Extract value for all slot in one shot. 

We will focus on using two models to solve the conversion, and focus on extracting value for one slot each time. Of
course, since we are using decoder-only model, two models are really just two different prompt templates typically
using the same model. 


Reference:
1. [How to fine-tune both retriever and generator for better performance](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.01352.pdf)
2. [How to fine-tune retriever assuming blackbox generator](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.12652.pdf)
